uh
laughs
[Music]
okay how was your experience
it was not difficult i think it was
fine yes it was purely based on the
materials we
cover in the class and or just uh
while you were doing a quiz i thought
probably it's better to give you
feedback now because you already
reviewed questions
pro your brain is ready to
get the uh
correct response now rather than because
i usually give the students feedback
within the following week
but i think it's better to share with
you by feedback i mean
correct answers if you agree we can
discuss about
correct answers correctly and then we
can go through our lectures if you don't
have enough time by the end of this
session to cover everything for water
sensor network three we will continue
next session
if you agree i'll give you uh correct
answers now
yes please please yeah because you are
super excited to see what dance is
okay let me share my screen
uh let me um let me just record the
session or click
button just in case if someone missed
this session
uh
oh i mentioned routing one and writing
two
in the uh in my announcement uh
everything from
previous week and the uh
week before last one so it was based on
mainly about that quiz was about uh
routing bond
because of uh mentioned about
hierarchical base writing briefly at
very high level in
that session but uh because we postponed
the police
uh um mission announcement we have
routing one and two
am i right and for next week we have
routing one routing two and routing
three
in our quiz let me
share my screen
and also start recording
okay could you see my screen
yes here we can see
in the present review am i right
in here okay okay here i think this was
your first question
uh i'm hoping i've got the same order
but probably because we should have a
question in the quiz
you have seen different order but anyway
this was one of the questions how many
rating pass from end nodes to c
can you identify in the blue wireless
sensor network
field four pass
one here the other one from here
third one from here and last one from
here
any question for this one
why is this uh not three paths given
that
um yeah but two of them are using the
same path it should be
three this is different from here to
here is a different path
so the starting point is different
you change you have a source and
destination you change the source
uh location so that
at the very last stop is basically
considered there are two trains
the only difference is the last or first
stop
so we call two different paths
only because it's more like the whole
network
perspective rather than per node
perspective because per new perspective
there will be
one part for those two in the middle
right because next hot
is the one in the top yes but
from the network perspective there's
four parts yes
okay and this is from routing yes
exactly from
it's our routing path so in case you
lose this source
you have another pass here to send your
package to the
sink
so this question troll force
first one routing function is a key
responsibility of the transport
layer true pulse
yes it's a key responsibility of uh
network layer
in the flat base protocols all sensor
nodes are
treated equally and have the same
functionality
truefalls
okay yes great
this is exactly the definition of flat
base routing
multi-pass routing use multiple routes
simultaneously
possible true
true yes great
and this is a basic
behind the multi-pass writing we want to
enhance redundancy by having
a multi run simultaneously
in hierarchical routing all sensor nodes
perform the same role
we cover this in routing one are not in
two but
because that was the definition for
flat-based routing
so always remember your water sensor
network team you have
a leader your master has similar to
virus
so not necessarily all nodes play the
same role
last one proactive route discovery sets
out after they are needed
false false and you see the name
actually helps you to
make a against this variety okay well
done
uh last one what is the goal of uh
maximum minimum
energy capacity metric in wider sensor
network
protect low capacity from premature
exploration
well done i really like your
engagement yes exactly this is based on
definition
so um
that's it and will publish your results
very soon just after the
class i need to go through canvas i
don't want to take our class time now
but you will see your results very
quickly so generally speaking i just
wanted to tell you something
uh see if you attend a class
if you just listen to me probably
sometimes boring but if you just
stay in a class for a couple of hours
and just review materials
lecture notes you will get very good
marks in all quizzes
like today
i would like to encourage you to take a
look at the textbook
but i designed the questions in a way
that
you don't have to review all those
materials
by just reviewing lecture notes because
i try to capture everything in lecture
notes
and attending class and asking your
questions i think
you will in terms of theoretical parts
you will
be on a safe side any questions before
we start our lecture
live
[Music]
no
let me see if i can open the
chat box here
thanks thank you for your confirmation
faithy
vail aditya
okay thanks ali for your comments
so uh ready to start our
lecture three we have another and 30
minutes and i will do my best to give
like five minutes break in the middle so
it shouldn't be
boring for you
feel free to stop me anytime if you have
any questions
uh i'm recording this session uh
and just if you want to uh review
materials later but feel free to stop me
for questions and
anything else so today we're going to
wrap up
routing wireless sensor network uh part
three
and our main focus will be on location
based routing
i'm gonna give you a an overview of
whatever we covered within the past
couple of sessions
probably next week not today once we
finish this one i can give you an um
general overview so if you missed
previous session we can
catch up on those materials next week
so um we will remember this uh diagram
in terms of routing protocols we
focus on wireless sensor network
topology in terms of last place or
required base and today we're going to
focus on location based
in terms of operation type we cover
different things like negotiation
based quality of service and other
things and
in terms of route discovery mechanism we
discussed about reactive and corrective
and hybrid routing last session
so plasma is routing as most of you
i believe probably 99 percent of your
just check your results now
uh you'll answer to this question
correctly in the quiz all nodes are
uh they play same role in platform
in hierarchical based routing basically
we have a higher energy notes for
transmission because it's really
energy consuming mechanism and then
lower energy notes for sensing we have
basically two-layer routing and
the main idea is to increase the
lifetime of our network that was
hierarchical based
location-based routing to me i think
this is the routing you can
make more relation because it's based on
the other name is geographic based
routing and you can
create examples for yourself for this
kind of uh routing i think i mean it's
uh it's very tangible this this part uh
type of
writing sensor nodes are basically
location-based routing are addressed
based on their location
and uh we can get this location address
through
gps or by coordination among
nodes so they they are aware of their
own address
address of their neighbors and they can
create
links we call it location based or
geographic
writing and
but now receiving a notification here uh
they don't have that much bandwidth
in uh location based routing uh they
basically it's assumed that
nodes can find their
position approximately and also
they know the location of their
destination and their neighbors
so location information can be queried
or obtained
from a location agent we briefly
discussed last
session about agents and hierarchical
based routing
so this is how they find their own
location and the location of their
neighbors and destination
we have different types of geographic
routing
one of them is unicast basically we have
a single destination
the other one is multicast we have one
center
multiple destinations it's similar to
our class
uh as your mom center i'm sending you an
announcement
and you are all my receiver
so i have a group of students
multiple destinations basically and also
we have geocache
routing as a type of geographic based
routing
data is propagated to nodes between
certain geographic area
so basically we define address based on
geographic area for example we want to
send an information to everyone who
lives in
broadway so
no matter how many users are there it
can be
one receiver or multiple receiver
we only take we only care about the
area the geographic area
so in terms of unicast
we you mentioned there are three types
unicast multicast jokers
and then for each of them we have uh
different uh
uh protocols we're gonna cover them in
today's lecture as much as we can
so let's focus on unicast first
unicast location based routing and
we have different type of routings in
this protocol a greedy
perimeter stateless routing and
geographical
adaptive fidelity don't worry about
names uh
try to include some examples in the
lecture notes so you can understand them
and deeply and multicast dual casting we
will cover them
later so a unicast
location based routing we have one
single destination
each forwarding node see we have source
here
we have one single destination here and
these are our forwarding nodes can we
can
create a route through here or through
here but these are all forwarding nodes
each forwarding node makes a localized
decision i mean
based on their local rule in this region
based on the location of the destination
and the node's neighbor
we call it greedy forwarding the reason
is called greedy because in each um
jump we would like to make ourselves or
the packet closer to the destination
so we call it greedy forwarding so we
move
in a way to make ourselves closer to
this
destination as much as possible so
rather than going through this way
on top because it's a longer path
through destination we selected this one
because we
can use this greedy forwarding mechanism
if there is any question please feel
free to ask me yourself and ask me
so 3d
perimeter stateless routing as
one type of unicast location based
routing
and let's see what's this one uh as i
mentioned
greedy means we want to minimize this
sense uh to destination in each hop
so we want to have a positive
move at uh
from each hub so
there are some definitions in this
protocol so we go through them one by
one
and if there is any question please let
me know because i think this is the most
important part of a unicast routine
nearest with forwarding there are
different types of
neighbors we need to select depends on
the definition
for example if our aim is to find the
nearest with forwarding progress
nfb so which node can meet this criteria
basically this means nearest of all
neighbors that make
positive progress in terms of geographic
distance to our destination
here is our source this is our
destination and these are some nodes
here in this region in this geographic
region
which if we have a packet as a source we
want to
forward it to our destination so we need
to basically
pass it to another forwarding node which
node is our
nfp is the nearest of all neighbors
nearest
of all neighbors that makes positive
progress
towards destination so it should be near
to the
source and it should also make positive
progress towards destination for example
if you have a node here
we don't have it here just imagine if
you had another node here very close to
s
but it was not creating a positive
progress with ascension so that couldn't
be
nfv so it should meet two criteria
nearest of all neighbors
which make positive progress towards
destination
so what would you suggest as nfv in this
graph
any idea a
yep thanks musha any other ideas
so it should be near nearest to the s
and also make positive progress
towards the destination
thanks basal
yes well done okay that's great hey
i don't know why i didn't make animation
for this one to just change the circle
uh
color but yes that was a so
next next one most forwarding progress
between radius mfr this is basically a
neighbor that
makes uh greatest positive progress
towards destination so what's the
definition of progress
imagine we have a line between s and d
this dash line here could you see this
dashed line
draw this line and then progress is a
distance
between source and it's the neighbor
node
projected onto a line so we have
different nodes here
we have this line from s to d and
then draw this uh uh
drawing progress it's basically this uh
projected uh line on this uh
uh dash line here is the distance
between source and its neighbor
so you have this c for example here this
a here
then draw this line you have you can
find the progress here is the distance
between source and its neighbor
that are projected on a line so
basically we want to find a
neighbor that makes greatest positive
progress
you want it's like a football team you
want to pass you
pass the ball to someone who who can
make the greatest positive progress
so which one be
thanks ali thanks sir prison thanks
juanji thanks faysal thanks john
any other ideas
so my quick question why not e
all right
yes it was a bit uh honestly hard for
myself also to distinguish which one is
uh closer or not yes
in vertical b is correct
but this was really nice that you
recognize this
so basically you need to draw this
dashed line and then
find the progress here it's the distance
between source and destination so you
have this projected here yes it is b
if you send your packet through b you
have the
greatest positive progress to rsd
next one um compass routing neighbor
with
smallest angle between a line drawn from
source to the neighbor and the line
connected source and destination
again you have this line connecting
source and destination
and you need to draw this uh
another line between source and each
node and see which one can create the
smallest angle
this angle here or draw this line from s
to
a and then see what's the angle
so this is basically compass routing
which one
you think
for nfp uh what is
a the other one okay so
[Music]
compass writing is c yes
well on facebook motion uh
what other students think because i
think same students answered the
previous question
this your engagement is really important
to me so pleasure
but yes well done
if you draw this line then you will see
the smallest angle
angle can be created for node c
i can't uh can we can say what's the uh
benefit or advantage disadvantage these
are some
description and forward
some forwarding strategies basically in
uh unicast routing
we may define them to uh
create our routing later we may use this
is basically just
familiar with definition so uh
there might be some probably energy
saving mechanism if you have a
smaller uh angle or some other things
but i think it's basically
to do with energy to create this
because if you want to pass it through
this one probably the angle
means you need to go through uh
uh you need to say use more energy
but i think the a is closer so nfv can
in terms of energy saving is the best
depends on your metric
and your routing
if if energies matters i think a
nfv foreign fees can save you lots of
energy but
there are this is a multi-angle question
you may think if you send it to a you
can save energy but on the other side
you need to send it to another hub again
to make it closer to the
destination so probably mfr can save you
more energy so i mean there
should be multiple things we should
consider in our routing
we may need to cover a few of them
yes exactly depends on the node
placement
yes yes
okay so crazy forwarding again we
want to use it in unicast routing
packets are marked by the
originator with the destinations
location
so it's like sending a letter to someone
you have a
sender address and also destination
address
on an envelope as a result a forwarding
node can make a locally
optimal greedy choice in choosing a
package next hop everything is locally
in based on that geographic region
if you not know this radio neighbor's
position
this is a radio range basically we can
sense
uh other neighbors we can find their
positions if they
if you are in the same radio range you
see there are some overlaps
and from hardware perspective each node
has an antenna
and they can create this radio range
and their vicinity so other nodes can
find their location and also they can
find location of other nodes so this is
these are you see there are some
overlaps
especially when we have many sensors in
the same uh geographic location
so if you not not know this radio
neighbor's position the locally optimal
choice of next hope is the neighbor
geographically closest to the package
destination
so the node which is which is very close
to the package destination
here this one is the
locally optimal choice because we want
to it's like a again football team
uh you pass the ball uh someone who is
very uh who's who has the probability of
uh uh making like a lucky goal so
the locally optimal choice of nexo is
the neighbor geographically
closest to the package destination
forwarding in this
uh strategy follows
successively closer geographic hops so
we want to make ourselves as much as
possible
closer to the destination this is why we
call it the
greedy forwarding until the destination
is reached
so our aim is to make that big jump in
greedy forwarding no matter how many
hopes
we our aim is to make ourselves closer
geographically closer to the destination
so there is a problem in this routing
i'm gonna show it here try an example
packet may arrive at a note without
neighbors that could serve as next hope
to bring the packet closer to the
destination
so you you send it to this one because
you believe
this neighbor can bring your packet
closer to the
destination you have this greedy
forwarding but you are not aware of
here you are not aware of other nodes
here
you may or may not have a route here
from this node to other nodes so the
problem is you may find yourself in a
void or a hole so
how to avoid the void so here i'll
prepare an example
to show you what does this mean we have
a source we have a destination we're
going to use
greedy forwarding challenge so we want
to make our packet
as much closer to the destination as
much as possible we want to
make that have that big jump so this is
our radio range of uh
source so all nodes within this radio
range
can see this uh source and they have
others of their own
uh their own as well as others of their
neighbors
and the source so they can communicate
with each other and here is the radio
range of
destination so if you want to use greedy
forwarding
mechanism we send our packet to why
because the boy can uh we we are in
greedy mode
why can't it's a bigger jump compared to
other notes here
if we send it to yb we can make
ourselves
closer to the destination
any questions so you know why we
selected this note because it's closer
to the destination and it is within the
radio range of s
so rather than sending to this one or
this one or this
is sent our package to boy
because it is uh closer to the
destination so because we are greedy in
this
strategy now
we have s we have different notes here
and we have destination so we send
this is again our radio range uh of uh
sender and receiver uh source and
destination
so and greatly forwarding we send our
packet
through uh sender to destination through
the
shortest path so uh these are the
destinations
these are the distance sd here
and geographically is a smaller than
wd and smaller than yd
wd and yd so if you want to send our
packet through w we should travel
all the way from s w b and d
and also if you want to send our packet
through y we should send all our packets
through
by the way don't confuse names with
previous slides this is another slide
uh because we had wider as well so if
you want to send it also through this
way we should travel
all the way from voice z to d so about
if we send it directly to d you see
geographically if you just
uh use your ruler here it is a smaller
uh as a shorter pass compared to these
two other parts is it clear
it's not over i don't know if you should
call it overlapping or not
but you should be in the other radio
range this is why you you can't
find their location of the destination
and other neighbors
otherwise you cannot hear them or find
their address
overlapping here between this this
radial range is basically
means that you can find the location of
these neighbors
yes it's in radio range so
did you understand this part we be uh
using this security forwarding means
rather than sending
our information through this way here or
through this one through
wd or yd we send it through sd
because geographically is a shorter uh
route but there might be a problem
uh because there is void here s is not
aware of uh
uh situation here
says that this route is shorter
but the problem is there is no other
node here
to work as a like a hop
for s so we send our packet to d but
we have a void here so we lost our
practice
this is a this is the problem of greedy
forwarding
we find ourselves in void or whole
because the only thing
we the only thing we consider as a
greedy forward and we consider
geographical distance which is shorter
here and we didn't consider
uh different other things like having a
hub here or not
so we found ourselves in a void or hall
yes yes ali so and not
advertiser distance so s has a
has an understanding of distance uh
from itself to destination but other
information is not
considered greedy forwarding beauty
forwarding only focuses on
a shorter geographical distance and
other things are ignored
this is why we have a void here and
because we
use the greedy forwarding
and does it normally use proactive
routing so they know the routes prior
or is it more reactive or it doesn't it
much
that's a very good question that's a
very good question yes
to minimize this problem it's good to
have
that now be focusing on uh
different type of writing topology but
it's good to have but consider
routing mechanism like proactive
reactive this is exactly
what routing is quite uh
complicated problem because we need to
consider multiple things if just
focusing on
writing mechanism in terms of
geographical based writing without
considering other things as you
mentioned like your proactive writing
this is a problem we're going to face
because we don't have any knowledge and
we don't care about
other things here in bisping we just
care about
geographical distance which is shorter
here from std
so that's how everyone knows everyone
has the same route table and
they know the distance between each
another node and that's how you can fall
into void is it yes
yes and i'm going to cover it in the my
next slide is that how we can avoid this
void uh yes
thank you ali uh yes britain there isn't
a route so
basically the package will not be sent
it is sent from s
but it will be lost here so we cannot
complete our route here
so the problem can be addressed by
greedy perimeter stateless routing
gpsr don't worry about acronyms the
algorithm basically
includes two methods grid forwarding as
we mentioned and also
perimeter forwarding what does this mean
basically we follow greedy forwarding
because we want to
make that big jump we want to make
ourselves closer to the destination as
much as possible
while we can use perimeter forwarding
when we find ourselves
in a void or whole
like a previous example so
in this uh routing uh
and not forwards packet to neighbor
which is geographically closest to the
destination
because we are greedy in a greedy
mode and when we face a challenge of
voice or hold we use a perimeter
basically we use
right hand side rule to
travel along the graph so for example in
this example we have x
as a center and then we have destination
x is closer to the destination
than its neighbors like here like
previous example
than w and y so this is
using uh greedy forwarding x to d
uh this uh direct line is the shortest
path
so uh this greedy perimeter stateless
routing uses right hand rule to traverse
the graph so we can when we find
ourselves in void for next time we lost
our packet
uh uh i use a experience for the next
time
we travel along the uh graph
or next time we have a packet so
probably similar to creating a table
and then mark it in our table that there
was a void here so next time we use the
right hand
rule to travel along the graph
any questions for this one
[Music]
probably next slide can clarify it for
you
greedy perimeter status routing we have
greedy forwarding as well as
perimeter when when we face a
challenge of void or hold so
x here this one this is our source
origin is the packet to you
see here and then we want to use the
right hand rule to avoid void for
example in our network
then you send it to z and uh using right
hand rules that send you to w
and then so we're not gonna transfer uh
we
we cannot transfer our packet from x to
d
the this is a problem challenge we try
uh right right-hand rule
uh we this is we end up with x u z
w u x so we the packet is back to
x again the problem is because we have
this
cross edge here see if you have a cross
here
when we have this uh cross lines in our
network we would not be able to use a
right hand rule
so the solution that this is a challenge
right hand rule does not work with the
cross edges
the solution is we need to remove that
cross
edge as long as we're not going to
partition our network
so in non-planar graphs uh right-hand
rule may take
a tour of edges that does not trace the
boundary of a closest
polygon so a graph in which no two edges
cross is known as planar
so we need to have a planar graph in
order to be able to use the
right hand rule so in planar graph we
shouldn't have
crossing edges if we do we should remove
them
and that it's not simply removing a
cross edges because basically by
removing a line we remove connection and
links between two nodes
you should make sure there are other
links or rats uh towards uh
to connect those nodes
so we can see we cannot simply remove
crossing edges we need to
remove it in a way that the network uh
not
partition two types of planar graphs
these are two famous
uh types rng and
relative neighborhood graph and also
gabriel
graph see this was our previous example
we had cross stage here
i just removed that one to create this
is planner now
and removing that line didn't traffic
our network
significantly because still we have
routes uh through these
nodes that was basically uh
unnecessarily
uh link or route so we made the graph
planner
we remove wz from the graph
and now we're gonna apply right hand
rule to avoid the void
so we send our packet from x to u and
uses
it and then destination received our
packets and we can have this closed loop
so in if you want if you have a graph
you want to
or network you want to make it a
planner here is a very simple code you
can see
and basically it means uh
explanation of uh this code is here
basically the loan between you and b
here
you see this intersection area here
intersection of radial ranges of two
nodes
each node has a radial range as we
discussed earlier
and there must be some overlaps in the
radial range this intersection here
so this loom is called loon this area
must be empty of any
other nodes such as w here
and if you want to make our graph planar
so if this region is not empty
the link uv will be removed
so to make it a planner and this is
basically is written here
if you want to try it
any questions
so if there is a note here in this
intersection
then we need to remove this link
otherwise
there wouldn't be any cross engage
so some of some examples this is a
original it's a real based on real
example the full graph of a radio
network
200 noz uniformly randomly placed on a
2000 multiplier by 2000 meter region
with a radio range of 250 meter
so you can see it's very messy and it's
obvious it's not planar
so we cabrillo graph is created by
removing
some uh crossing edges and
make it somehow planar uh it's a subset
of the full graph
still the network has the should have
the functionality of the same
original graph of course we remove some
lines here but we should get the same
functionality of the original one but it
is much more cleaner
and in this one we can apply right hand
side rule
now a better one is rng a relative
neighborhood graph
it's basically a stop set of full
and also a cabriole graph so we remove
more
crossing edges and it's not an easy work
because every time you want to
remove a link you should think about
from different angles
if all nodes are still accessible if
you're gonna
create any partitioning in your network
or not
so these two these are versions of
original one without
crossing edges any questions
questions no
thanks john so
[Music]
as a summary for greedy perimeter status
yes
questions no
[Music]
okay uh once receiving a grid mode
packets
greedy mode package for forwarding and
node searches it's
a neighbor table to the neighbor
geographically
closes to the package destination
because we want to have this
greedy forwarding probably ali that was
uh that was
like a answer to your question you
mentioned about corrective
uh we create a table but uh if we
combine proactive with this one it would
be more advanced
and then we can from each each time we
make our greedy forwarding we can update
the table
to avoid the voice in future when no
neighbor is closer
the note marks
[Music]
okay so uh
when there is no neighbor is closer so
we uh
the node marks the packet into uh
perimeter mode when no neighbors closer
basically this is
when we have a void or hole we want to
avoid it so we can have this
primitive mode to avoid the void
so was it clear creative forwarding if
you have any questions please feel free
to ask
now before we move on to geographical
adaptive fidelity
ruth are you tired do you want to take a
break
you had quiz as well
great thanks musha
[Music]
let me cover this and then probably we
can take a break
five minutes before we move on to
multicast location based routing
so uh second type of location uh
unicast location-based routing is
geographical adaptive fidelity
and then we go through multicast and
geocaching
gaf is basically designed for networks
with
mobile nodes to remember like uh
that's fine that's one don't worry
things happen with uh
online classes it's totally fine
and basically in geographical adaptive
fidelity
we use it for mobile notes and remember
some examples for example we have uh
we discussed about having nodes to
measure air pollution
or water quality or
last week example nodes on
sensors on bosses so this is
this is a mechanism we can use for
mobile nodes
network region is divided into virtual
grid like this
graph here in each cell these are cells
for example this is cell ace
is very similar to hierarchical base
routing
in terms of having a grid and also
having cells basically
you can probably relate it to a cluster
and in each cell only one node this
black one here is a forwarder at
any given time so we have only one one
similar to cluster head we have only one
forwarder
at any given time all other nodes can
slip
so this way we can save our energy we
can
extend the network lifetime we have a
big assumption
in this um geographical adaptive
fidelity all nodes within a cell can
communicate with
all nodes between all adjacent
cells so all these nodes can communicate
with all nodes here
and almost here this is the assumption
the the the reason we need to have this
criteria because
uh this time uh this black circle here
is our full border next time
the other node may be coming forward and
this node should be able to communicate
with this cell as well as this cell
uh so uh they should be able to
communicate with all nodes
they may not be forwarded at that time
but they should have this capability
just in case if they become a forwarder
they can
create this communication link
so in geographical adaptive fidelity we
have basically different aspects
three main states discovery
active and sleep in discovery state uh
these nodes here this white circles here
uh initially they are in discovery state
where
they listen for messages from other
nodes between a cell
each node uses like a timer when timer
expires not broadcast
discovery message and interactive state
so they listen for a while to
uh messages from other nodes this way
they can save their energy
and then after time exploits they can
broadcast
discovery messages this is basically to
find their neighbors
within active estate not periodically
re-broadcast discovery messages
and they set another timer to re-enter
discovery estate after
timer's expiration this is the state
where they
gonna consume most of the energy and
then
sleep a state the north inter uh sleep
state from both discovery and active
assay
whenever they determine that some other
node is forwarded
so when we have this forwarder here
because they
broadcast their messages they discovered
other nodes in
different cells so now it's selected as
a forwarder then
all other nodes can go through to this
sleep state and they previously
re-enter discovery state to see what's
happening and to see if they
are required to become a forwarder or
not
so as a forwarder uh
the forwarder not determine using a
negotiation process
you remember our negotiation-based
protocol in our previous session
basically they negotiate they have some
local
rules based on this they become a
forwarder nodes in activists say
basically they have a better chance to
become forwarded rather than those in
discovery state or definitely in a
sliver state because they are
in active state they can become
forwarder quickly
so there are some negotiations between
nodes
here to select to elect a
forwarder
uh when would no go from a slip back to
discover that's a very good question uh
motion they probably they they have like
a timer
say every five minutes depends on the
local rule we define our network depends
on the sensitivity of our application
for example measuring air pollution is
very different to measuring some
sensitive uh health problem
so we define this period this
time interval in our network and those
periodically re-enter
discovery state to broadcast their
situation
and to see if they have a chance to
become a forwarder or not
so uh notes in activists say
basically they have been over nothing
discovery state to become a
forwarder
[Music]
uh some uh uh
obviously advantages for this uh
topology is
only one node is awake in each zone
and the rest can slip so we can extend
the lifetime of our network
we can save our energy by turning off
unnecessarily
unnecessary nodes and the goal of this
mechanism is to quickly reach a state
where a cell has only
one active node because being in this
discovery set is also energy consuming
so we want to pass through this stage
discovery to active estate very quickly
to select our forwarder and then
everyone can sleep
this is somehow similar to teamwork uh
you share a lot and someone take a load
for a specific period of time and other
one can take a risk while
the other person is doing their work
basically for group work not
teamwork so we covered unicast
location-based routing greedy perimeter
status
routing and also geographical adaptive
fidelity
now next one is
uh multicast location best routing and
we have a scalable
position based multicast and then last
one is geocaching
so uh would you like to take five to ten
minutes break
uh if we don't cover everything here
in today's session uh i may postpone the
next week quiz but i think we can cover
it uh
we let me see how many slides left here
yeah 59 okay let's take five
to ten minutes uh break uh you also have
cools today
uh i really want to see you full of
energy here and we will come back in
uh 10 minutes uh 10 to 8 to 10 minutes
around 5
20. this is good
sounds good great yeah thank you
thank you gravity coffee something sweet
and fruit whatever you like it's the
beauty of
probably working or studying from home
you have access to everything
thanks
thanks uh samaksha let me know by the
way if i'm
mispronouncing your name uh i'd like to
uh learn
it's correct it's collected some iksha
that makes us great
thanks thank you
uh
oh
ah
are you back after this
very quick work okay let's continue on
multicast location based routing
scalable position based multicast
thanks mission
i'm also back with this
so um multicast the definition is
basically when we want to deliver same
packet to multiple
receivers there must be different
solutions that
may come to your mind in terms of
multicasting simple solution one
imagine we have a group we want to
send them some same information and we
have only one
source simple solution one is to deliver
copies of same packet to each
individual receiver for your unicast
routing
we have different uh uh teams uh
uh or groups in our values also network
we have i think uh
i don't know how many uh each four
students created a team
if i want to let's say team one if i
want to communicate with you
you you can you can imagine you are like
a
multicast group i want to communicate
all of you with within that school
one simple solution the first simple
solution is
i communicate each of you individually
in that team it's not really efficient
because you have a team of four if
if you if i want to send you same
information same email
through this mechanism i should send
each of you individually
same information four times so basically
we use
unicast as a part of this multicast
solution two is to flood the entire
network i want to communicate
group one in our class so uh with same
information
so i flood the entire network of
broadcasted and onset on
canvas so everyone can receive the
information definitely
your team will also receive the
information but again this is not
resource
efficient this flooding
multicast routing this is basically the
most efficient one is
um basically we send the same packet to
all receivers within that
group we minimize the number of links
the packet has to travel
i send only one email to your team if i
want to communicate with your group
security so this is basically multicast
routing
so the optimum approach is we have a
source and destination
or basically our this leap notes here
so we i only communicate with these
these are multicast
groups i only communicate with these
groups here
rather than sending information one way
one to all this
uh leaf approach one or flood the entire
network
or communicate with different groups
individually one time only
so we have a definition here scalable
position based
multicast spbm it's basically relies on
group management
to maintain lists of all destination for
a packet
packet header basically has a group
membership information in a set of all
destinations addresses
this is meant basically to ensure
efficiency
network is represented as a quad tree
here
it's it's like a multi-layer sorry
it's basically like a multi-layer
addressing
strategy with pre-defined number of
uh levels all nodes between level zero
are in radio range of each other so i'm
going to explain it in the
next slide with uh with an example the
main concept is we have
a group management here so rather than
flooding the entire network
or using unicast to
communicate with each node in that
group we create this
a grid here and we have uh this
uh group management mechanism to
communicate with groups rather than
individuals or the entire network
uh probably it's a bit uh
complicated to understand this because
it's like a
two dimensional graph here
but imagine we have multiple layers we
have level one and
here we have uh level three
level two level one and level zero on
top
then we have these are these are
multi-layer multi-layers stacked
together
and for example just take a look at this
one
square four four two is a level
zero square the top top level we call it
level zero
is the level zero square and it is also
located in level three level three is
the
first layer which actually which
includes all these groups together
so it's the level zero square located in
the level three square
that covers the entire network the
bottom layer
and then the level two square four
because it's four four two it is
when we moved from level three to level
two
then we have uh four squares in layer
and this this one is located in uh
square four because you can see yes from
the first number here
and then layer one uh square four
forty 44 it's a bit confusing you don't
need to go through
that much details but just remember
something we have multiple layers
and then each layer we have four scores
this is how we can
create addressing and and manage our
groups then there are more examples in
the textbook if you want to delve deep
into this topic
but uh this is just mainly for your
information to see how you can
create this uh three digits
address for our notes
so notes maintain two tables a global
member table and also local member table
in global member table
we have entries for the three
neighboring scores for each layer and
also
each entry contains the scores
identifier and list of nodes in the
score basically we
keep these addresses in our
global member table i'm going to show it
in an example later
in a local member table we basically we
have
all members of the node level 0
neighbors
here these are level 0 neighbors the
smallest neighborhood we created at
last and see we have this layer 3 which
includes uh
which covers the entire network then we
have this level two and in level two we
can focus only on for example a square
one or a square
four here and then in a square four we
can
this is actually our layer one we have
four different
squares 41 42 43 44
and then we have this zero layer here on
top which we have
four four one four four two and this
yes yes you're right
find you so
we gonna
[Music]
focus on membership information in our
local member table
uh we want to see our groups
and our neighbors our local neighbors in
this
table and all
local members they broadcast a location
periodically between nodes the level
zero square
so nodes between this score they
communicate with each other they
broadcast the information
with these three digits so
here is i think you can probably
understand through this example
uh easier uh this is uh imagine you
you've got this address this is the
local between local member table
what this address can tell you is
notes belong to multiple group of two
six
and eight whenever you see this one
basically this shows the
uh nodes uh uh
group they these nodes with this address
they belong to
groups two six and eight
and with these adders for example
indicates that the node is a member of
multicast group 1
because we have 0 for other groups so
the node doesn't belong to other groups
so nodes in level 0 square they
frequently disseminate their global
member table to all other nodes
in their level one score so they
they are aware of each other location
the most important part of this topic i
think this one
you if you see this address these
numbers you you can understand
uh that wherever you see one this means
the note
belongs to that multicast group
uh again in a scalable position based
multicast we use greedy forwarding to
choose our next top neighbors
and we use splitting to send the
copies of the same packet into different
and basically when we get to the region
we split the region and then we send our
copies this is to minimize the
communication splitting is based on the
heuristic that provides a trade-off
between total number of nodes forwarding
the packet and the
optimality of the individual routes
towards the destination
and once the forwarding nodes find the
multicast member in its local member
table
it forwards package directly to that
node
so we go one by one we go through the
region
then we find our multicast member in
this
local table then we forward it directly
we're not going to flood the network
we're not going to use a unicast routing
we find that a group member first and
then
we send our information
and again if we face the void or hole we
use the
perimeter routing like before
any questions
so the last one is the
jaw casting based routing
and we're going to focus on geographic
and energy available
and geographic forwarding uh perimeter
geocache
and joe casting as you can guess from
the name a packet is sent to
all or some nodes between a specific
geographic region
so this is our criteria we don't care
about other
metrics we mentioned before we only care
about specific geographic area for
example
there is an alarm in a city for for
flood or bushfire
we send an order to that specific region
especially when we don't have exact
location of individual sensors
we select select them based on their
geographic region
you may not have you want to send me a
for example an alarm
you may not have my exact uh
home location but you know as roughly
where i'm living for example
let's say in sydney not roughly so you
flood the entire network in sydney to
send an alarm to everyone in that region
so it's basically
this is basically for all arms or for
when we care about the
specific region
uh and in terms of browsing method uh
propagate the packet
we usually to minimize our
communication we propagate attack
packets
near the target region similar to
unicast routing
but this is basically to make ourselves
uh
closer to the target region not
specifically a single
node in unicast so we make our we send
our packet
closer to the target region and then we
distribute the packet between that
target region similar to multicast so
this is the routing
method we want to make ourselves first
closer to the
specific geographic region once we are
closed then we propagate the packets
so we're not going to plot the network
through entire region
and we're not gonna uh use a unicast
routing
so we focus on the region first when we
are
close enough then we disseminate our
uh information
so two uh that was generally
generally for geocaching now
geographical energy avail
routing uh we basically
use energy aware and geographically
informed neighbor selection
to send our packets towards the
destination region
the key idea is to basically we want to
uh consider a certain region rather than
sending the interest to the whole
network so this is basically this is why
we call it geography
and by doing this uh this geographical
energy available can
conserve more energy because we're not
going to send our packet to entire
region we just send it to a specific
region which is within our target
the basic concept basically includes
two main parts route package towards the
targets region through geographical and
energy avail
neighbor selection and also disseminate
and distribute the packet within that
region
so this is why we call it energy aware
because you only focus on a specific
region
there are some metrics here we need to
consider estimated cost
and also learned cost each node in this
uh
geographic and energy are very routing
has
two types of uh cost of reaching a
destination
they have a table they have this uh
table cost and if you want to select
them as enabler for
as a forwarder we should select uh see
if they
the cost of this transmission is uh
between our budget or not
estimators because there are some
equation here if you want to take a look
i'm going to explain it at a very high
level and the
learning costs a learning cost basically
is a requirement of estimated cost that
allows nodes to avoid the
voids and hold if there is any void or
hole in our network
we're gonna uh revise our estimated cost
estimated because it's something we
created as we calculated at the
beginning but in reality estimated cost
would be
different because we may see holes and
void in our network so we use this new
term learn cost
if there is no void learned cost is the
same as
estimated cost so uh
but uh most probably there are some
unknowns in our network in reality this
is why we have learned course and at any
time
when we see a void in our network we
update our estimated cost
so next time we know we should avoid
that specific note
because of uh because we may face a
hole so um
this geographic and energy available is
again based on a greedy forwarding so we
want to make a
big joint to bring our packets to the
destination
a package is sent to neighbor with
minimum learned costs
so uh this is why we call it greedy
forwarding
we send it to neighbors with minimum
learning costs uh
forwarder adjusts on learn costs based
on the new situation
and learn cost will increase if there is
a
void in our network so
other other nodes will find out the
updated cost
so if they want to make a decision to
use that node as a forwarder they know
what's the
learned cost
here is an example i think it's easier
to learn this
concept for example and also i have a
simple animation in my next slide
to explain this uh we have source here
and we have destination as a t uh or
target sen is sending a packet to
the target region uh we are in
geographic based routing so we care
about the region not
a single law so this is our target
region for example represents our region
estimated cost of uh for b
we have we have different neighbors here
for s we have a
and b assume here we have one
from s to a so if you want to
calculate the cost from s to b
what's this one estimated costs are
predefined cost
so it's basically root square of 1 to
the power of
2 plus here is also 1 from half to half
is 1
to plus 1 to the power of 2. so here is
the root
square of y so uh accelerated costs are
five for neighbors b and also i
same thing if you want to go here and
two for neighbor
uh a
so here is is true and
here is one am i right
2 to the power this one if you want to
calculate this one is basically root n
square of 2 to the power
of 2 plus
1 to the power of 2 from h to b so it
will be root
square of 5. am i right is it clear
imagine s2a is 2 and a 2b is 1.
so here s to b is with the score of y
great
thanks mushan john so as a sender
as a greedy sender you want to send a
packet to
from s to t which one you select you
select you select your packets
to go from s to a because here is only
two but here is rooted square of five
but the problem is if you send it to a
there is no
uh other notes here so you will find
yourself
in a hole or void
so a forwards package should be because
a doesn't have any other route director
there is
again remember we are in geographic
based routing
uh we want to make a greedy decision and
true a if we can send our packet
directly to t see this
uh this line is shorter than here
so this is why s selects
a rather than b but there is no route
from
a to t so we found ourselves in a hole
so
a forwards packet should be this sign
because this is the
b is a's neighbor and
the table will be updated so next time
we know there is no way
direct way from a to t and then we uh
learn something we see we
update our learned cost because we had
void here so we know next time we
shouldn't
send our packet directly to a so
neighbor b is a neighbor of a with the
minimum
learned cost a has other neighbors here
but
b is selected because b is closer to a
and we have this new
uh we calculate this learn cost here
basically we assume
cost of a to b is one and then the new
learned cost will be root score of 5
plus
1 this is the equation b distance of b
to t
plus cost of a and b
cos of a and b is 1 this
b and t is 5 if s wants to send it
through b
s has to pay rooted score of 5 here so
next time
we know if we send it to a we will be in
hold
so we set it directly to b
although the cost is more but this is to
avoid the
weight is it clear
so this is our learned cost equation
cost of
a to t and in previous
time we found a very uh as a like an
attractive note because a was
geographically closer to t
but now we learned that there is a void
here we gonna
update eight node a
cost table this is our learn cost a
to t we need to send it to b first and
then
we have this a we should cover this a b
cost as well
so we know next song a is not really
uh inexpensive because we need to
send it to b anyway so it's better to
send it
from s directly to b at the beginning
probably the this concept was a bit
confusing or complicated i'll have
this one here uh to show you more uh
what does this mean forwarding uh
around hole we have source we have this
target region
and we have different nodes here as a
as a neighbor and also we have a void
here
but we are not aware of this void here
as a source
we cannot see here we don't know if
there is any route here or not
the only thing we know that if we send
our packet directly from
s to c here this is the shortest path
so we calculate the
estimated cost of c to t which is two we
need to pass through two hops
and estimated cost of uh b2 target
region is with a square of five
it's rooted score of two to the power of
two here
plus here c2b is one one to the power of
two
so it's a root score of uh five is it
clear
same as previous example just wanted to
show it in this
simple animation so uh
which one would be a forwarder node for
s s is greedy and based on the
minimum cost it's going to select its
next forwarder
so c or b yes
yes face off yes thanks john thanks
faisal
yeah because it's two the other one is
rooted score of five
but s is not aware of these uh holes
here
so see what's gonna happen so s
will select uh
c as a as a forwarder
and then what's happening we gonna lost
our packets because there is no
root from direct route from c to t
so uh c pass the
packet to b nexon because
there is a route from c to b and then
through b we can create a route to
target region
and c will update this table learn
learned cost
is the cost of sending the packet to
neighbor and also
the estimated cost of
b and t
so next time s will send the packet
directly to b
because then now based on our learn
experience c is more expensive so it's
better to send it to b
and now we can reach our target region
is it clear
[Music]
okay once packet reaches target region
it can be r or t team previous one
simple flooding could be useful
because now we are in our region for
example a rich your group
you have a group of four students now i
can send a message to all of you
this would minimize our communication i
didn't flood the entire network
due to the cost of flooding again if you
want to minimize our cost
we can rely on recursive geographic uh
forwarding what does this mean
see this is our region target region
again when we reach our region rather
than flooding the entire region
we want to make it more energy aware
energy efficient
we create four copies of the packet
so guarantee that's a four smaller sub
region
uh or here so we create
four different uh sub regions we're not
going to flood the entire
this is our target region we're almost
there but
still we want to save more energy rather
than flooding the entire
target region we create four copies of
the packets
of four smaller sub-regions so in each
sub-region
we again we repeat the forwarding and
splitting process
again we create uh four other regions
here four other regions here
until node is reached exact uh node is
reached
this is the only one so then we can
send our packet only to that specific
node
so you could have used a unicast at the
beginning send a packet or copy a packet
to all nodes
uh individually but that was not
efficient so we
use this mechanism to reach our target
region first and again within our target
region we created
more sub regions to go closer and closer
to the destination
last one uh enjoy casting base routing
is uh geographic forwarding perimeter
jokers uh again we use grady forwarding
to propagate packet towards the
target region and destination is as
shown to be the center of the region
we use perimeter routing when to avoid
voids again
and meeting the target region flooding
can be used
similar to previous one
but this sessions that there are no
obstacles and gaps
if and it's assumed that all knows
within the region
must be able to reach each other without
going
out of the region i'm going to have a
very simple
example to show you this so when we get
to that target region
uh we assume that there is no obstacle
and gaps in that region but if there is
any gap what should we do
so we use the combination of jokers and
perimeter routing
how it's here once the packet this is
our this is our entire network this is
our target region
once the packet reaches the target
region
it is flooded to all nodes between this
region but in addition
region borders let me show you here in
this simple animation
but here here
this is our region you see there is a
gap here if we flood the entire
network only this part will get the
packet and the
this part is isolated from the uh
this source here so this second part
will not receive our packet
our solution the solution of geographic
forwarding perimeter jokers
is to use jaw casting so first we find
our target region
then and second thing is we use our
region
border this border nodes and we use this
perimeter
geocache to travel around this target
region
to reach the second part of our uh
network here
let's see how we do this so this
is our uh region border
north who receive information from this
part of the network and we travel all
the way
around the target region to reach the
second part of our network this is
basically because we have
a gap here and we address this
gap by traveling around the graph
so we call it uh premature jokers
notes outside the region use right hand
rule as we explained earlier
to forward packet to neighbors in the
planar graph
and as you can see the packet travels
around the
graph until they enter the region again
any questions
was it clear so this is basically when
you have a gap here
and even if you plot the entire target
region you will not be able to reach the
other part because there is no
route here in that region so we travel
around the
graph to reach the the other isolated
part of the
network
any questions no
[Music]
i think that's right so this is a
summary of
acronyms you don't need to memorize them
at all this is just for your information
i just wanted to summarize everything
here so you can refer to them if you
have any
if you couldn't remember some of them
and
we basically discussed about wireless
sensor network as specific
characteristics uh definitely wireless
sensor network require
a customized approach an algorithm for
routing and there are many
different type of routing we just cover
some of them
routing algorithm but none of them is
optimal based on your network based on
your application
your restrictions the cost everything
you can
create an optimal solution for your
network by combining
different uh algorithm or creating
information
yes we begin over the past uh
considering this session also over three
sessions we covered russian protocols
topology type and
mechanism and
let me see if i have no that's it so i
have a question here from ali
about the number of amount of different
opportunities yes of course
and believe it or not we have psja
students in our team
the in their phd topic for four years is
only about focusing on uh to
use to create optimum routing for one
specific network it's not an easy job
to cause lots of research and
investigation
and an experience
but uh you have your criteria as an as
an engineer for example
sometimes you're dealing with very
sensitive information costs may be
secondary so you can use a complicated
routing mechanism but sometimes you're
gonna
monitor uh
for example air pollution it wouldn't be
very sensitive the information is not
really sensitive
so you can use less complicated routing
on the other side depends on your
hardware you want to use for example for
different type of sensors then you can
develop
more fancy algorithms or not depends on
your storage your energy capacity
so there are many things at hardware
software level as a
as an engineer you should consider when
designing your
routing it's a it's a very good topic
it's a very hot topic especially for
both for engineers and uh researchers
at both uh especially in software domain
and uh there are many opportunities
because as i mentioned we discuss about
so many things uh
in terms of writing but none of them is
optimal so this is a good thing for you
as an engineer or researcher
there are many opportunities to advance
if you want to create a new
routing algorithm or protocol because
none of them is optimal it's there are
always room for
improvements so that was mainly i just
wanted to
share some examples and definitions
about
routing but this is just the beginning
if you are interested i can share some
research papers with you
if you would like to learn more about
writing it's a very
interesting topic and it's always on
demand and you can imagine with the
number of ig devices connected to
to the internet the demand for new
routing
protocols would be even more in coming
years
any questions
of course yes ali that's that's exactly
the thing
it is of course different in research
versus industry and the other thing
we're gonna discuss about uh security in
wireless sensor network and then you
will see how these two topics are
interrelated
if you create a good route then you can
somehow
maximize your security and
so these are probably security is
another thing you need to consider
when you design define your uh routing
for your network
uh yes
yeah that makes sense especially i guess
in industry where you know
every big company when they design such
sort of any sort of system security now
is always almost the
most important architectural concern yes
and
so like often just uh terms
things like you know efficiency and
whatnot if it is more secure much more
secure compared to some other approach
it will be definitely
taking forward it depends on the
industry i guess you know
financial industries or you know
government might be more sensitive but
it's very interesting and
i'm quite enjoying the topics of having
different approaches
thanks thanks sally um the only thing
just came to a moment because you
mentioned about industry
uh have invited a very special guest for
our you probably noticed from our
uh outline and i mentioned at the
beginning every year i
invite someone from industry to share
their experience from
because this subject is uh especially
for your
projects this is something based on
industry challenges your smartphone
project
and so the and you are postgraduate
students or undergraduate students but
uh you will become great engineers in
future so as a part of this service
every year i invite someone from
industry to share their experience with
you
and it's a great opportunity for you to
also to ask questions and
see what what are their approaching
industry in real applications about
wireless central network and iot you can
focus on routing security or general
things
but uh just confirm last week with
someone he's a technical lead in the
company and
he will join us uh for yes uh
lecture for guest lecturer in uh 26th of
what in april
but don't miss that session it's a good
opportunity also to get involved with
that company if you if you are planning
to
do something in industry later i think
it's good to hear from someone who's
been working in this domain for many
years
and he he was a former uts student by
the way
any questions we
completed writing so next week
we will have uh quiz 2 and
review this lecture and routing in
uh wireless and so network part one two
and this one three
and uh yes the style will be very
similar to today's the quiz
mainly multiple choice question and
probably true pause uh
uh and uh there is no negative mark
again
and we will do it uh at four
or a couple of minutes after four but
please uh log in
i noticed today some of you were waiting
in the meeting room
please log into zoom with your uts
details so you can
join the class directly
any questions from me
nope thanks
[Music]
uh we also have consultation today no
one uh
joined consultation and that's sort of
fun because we also have this time after
each session to
uh have discussion but we have
consultation every monday
just in case you feel like to chat with
me and two to three
the lecture time was one hour 30 minutes
each year
i increased it to two hours this year
mainly because to have more time to give
you a
break in the middle and also to have
more q a
at the end uh so if you
if you have if you need private meetings
uh individual meetings let me know
thanks john much i appreciate it and
thanks for uh thanks so much
and thanks for in your engagement today
i really enjoy it uh
whenever i have uh the question you
answered uh
very actively that was really good uh
let's try to make this online learning
more enjoyable
this is the only thing we can do
thank you have a good day bye thanks
thanks boy thanks whale thanks johan
they just thanks johan thanks joshua
that is our next quiz uh next week uh
based on the outline
uh double check i think next week
thanks mushan bye
uh
oh
so
i
foreign
uh
uh town
john
so
uh
um
[Music]
okay
uh